Base documentation for Luau C API (#106)
luau-lang/site: src/content/docs/reference/api.md

---
slug: api
title: C API
description: The official reference for Luau's C API.
sidebar:

>   order: 1

Reviewer: If you want this to be first, can you adjust the `order` for the other pages to bump the numbers down?

Author: Placed it at 3 and moved grammar one down.

---

## Virtual Machine State

```c
lua_State* lua_newstate(lua_Alloc f, void* ud);
```

Create a new instance of the Luau VM, represented as a handle to the *main* Luau thread of execution.

* `f` - memory allocation function
* `ud` - custom data pointer for the allocation function

Most of the APIs will accept a Luau thread as a parameter.

```c
typedef void* (*lua_Alloc)(void* ud, void* ptr, size_t osize, size_t nsize);
```

Allocation function type.

* `ud` - the data pointer passed to `lua_newstate` at VM creation time
* `ptr` - pointer to reallocate or free when `osize` is not zero
* `osize` - old size of the object, 0 when new object is allocated
* `nsize` - new size of the object, 0 when object is to be freed

> If the allocation fails, return value is a `nullptr`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the allocation fails, it should return a `nullptr`.
```

```c
lua_State* lua_mainthread(lua_State* L);
```

Returns the main thread of execution that the thread belongs to.
When called on main thread, returns itself.

```c
int lua_status(lua_State* L);
```

Returns the status `lua_Status` of the thread:

* `LUA_OK`
* `LUA_YIELD` - thread is currently yielded and can be resumed
* `LUA_ERRRUN` - thread has experienced a runtime error
* `LUA_ERRSYNTAX` - legacy error code, preserved for compatibility
* `LUA_ERRMEM` - thread has experienced an out of memory error
* `LUA_ERRERR` - thread has experienced an error during error handling
* `LUA_BREAK` - thread is currently waiting on a breakpoint and can be resumed

```c
void lua_resetthread(lua_State* L);
```

Reset the state of a thread for use to run new code.

Reset can only be made on threads that are not executing.

```c
int lua_isthreadreset(lua_State* L);
```

Check if a thread has been reset or has not started executing any code yet.

```c
void lua_setthreaddata(lua_State* L, void* data);
```

Associate custom data with an individual thread.

```c
void* lua_getthreaddata(lua_State* L);
```

Retrieves the custom data associated with a specific thread.

---

> Additional detail on manipulating threads on the Luau stack is described in the 'Coroutines' section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additional detail on manipulating threads on the Luau stack is described in [the 'Coroutines' section](#Coroutines).
```

## Loading Bytecode

```c
int luau_load(lua_State* L, const char* chunkname, const char* data, size_t size, int env);
```

Load bytecode into the VM.

* `chunkname` - a name to associate with the bytecode functions being loaded
* `data` - pointer to the bytecode
* `size` - bytecode size
* `env` - environment table to associate with loaded functions and to use when resolving imports

> When `env` is 0, current thread global table is used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When `env` is 0, the current thread's global table is used.
```

> When `env` is not 0, it must be an index to a table object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When `env` is not 0, it must be a stack index to a table object to use as the global table.
```

On success, returns 0 and places the top closure of the bytecode on the stack.
On failure, returns 1 and places a string with an error message on the stack.

<!--TODO: explain environment tables-->
<!--TODO: explain what imports are-->

---

> See the `lua_call`/`lua_pcall` on how to run the resulting closure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the documentation for `lua_call`/`lua_pcall` on how to run the resulting closure.
```

> ## Working with Stack

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Working with the Stack
```

```c
void lua_replace(lua_State* L, int idx);
```

Pop the item from the top of the stack and replace the item at the index with it.

```c
void lua_xmove(lua_State* from, lua_State* to, int n);
```

Move `n` elements from the top of `from` thread to the top of `to` thread, popping them from the `from` thread.

Threads have to belong to the same VM.

```c
void lua_xpush(lua_State* from, lua_State* to, int idx);
```

Copy element at the index of the `from` thread to the top of the `to` thread, leaving the `from` stack unchanged.

Threads have to belong to the same VM.

```c
int lua_checkstack(lua_State* L, int sz);
```

Reserve space on the stack for `sz` items.
Returns 1 on success, and 0 if stack limit for C functions is reached or no more memory for stack items can be allocated.

Stack limit for C functions is controlled by `LUAI_MAXCSTACK` configuration parameter, defined in `luaconf.h` (default 8000).
It is the maximum number of stack slots a single C function may use.

```c
void lua_rawcheckstack(lua_State* L, int sz);
```

Reserve space on the stack for `sz` items, ignoring the stack limit for C functions.

> Not recommended for general use as unlike `lua_checkstack`, it can still error on memory allocation failure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not recommended for general use as, unlike `lua_checkstack`, it can still error on memory allocation failure.
```

```c
void luaL_checkstack(lua_State* L, int sz, const char* msg);
```

> Try to reserve space on the stack for `sz` items or throw a `"stack overflow ({msg})"` error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Attempt to reserve space on the stack for `sz` items or throw a `"stack overflow ({msg})"` error.
```

## Type Inspection

Luau has the following value types, represented as `lua_Type` enumeration constants:

* `LUA_TNONE` - no value
* `LUA_TNIL` - the `nil` value
* `LUA_TBOOLEAN` - a `boolean` value
* `LUA_TLIGHTUSERDATA` - a light userdata value
* `LUA_TNUMBER` - a `number` value, representing a double type
* `LUA_TINTEGER` - an `integer` value, representing a 64-bit integer type
* `LUA_TVECTOR` - a `vector` value, representing a 3 or 4 component (LUA_VECTOR_SIZE) type
* `LUA_TSTRING` - a `string` value
* `LUA_TTABLE` - a `table` value
* `LUA_TFUNCTION` - a function value
* `LUA_TUSERDATA` - a userdata value
* `LUA_TTHREAD` - a thread value
* `LUA_TBUFFER` - a buffer value
* `LUA_TCLASS` - a class value
* `LUA_TOBJECT` - an object value

There are additional enumeration values which are for internal use and are subject to change.

```c
int lua_type(lua_State* L, int idx);
```

Returns the type of the value at the index.

```c
const char* lua_typename(lua_State* L, int tp);
```

> Returns the name for the type based on type tag `tp`, which is one of `"nil"`, `"boolean"`, `"number"`, `"integer"`, `"vector"`, `"string"`, `"table"`, `"function"`, `"userdata"`, `"thread"`, `"buffer"`, `"class"` or `"object"`.

Reviewer: I think this is true right now, but `class` and `object` are both subject to change. Unsure if we want to flag that.

Author: Added experimental notes.

`"no value"` is returned if the type tag corresponds to a missing value (see `lua_isnone`).

```c
const char* luaL_typename(lua_State* L, int idx);
```

Returns the type of the object.
For userdata objects that have a metatable with the `__type` field and are defined by the host (not `newproxy`), returns the value for that key.
For tagged light userdata objects, returns either the value registered by `lua_setlightuserdataname` or `"userdata"`.
For userdata objects created by `newproxy`, this function returns `"userdata"` to make sure host-defined types can not be spoofed.
`"no value"` is returned if there is no value at the index.

> Values other than userdata can have a shared metatable set with a `__type` value overriding the built-in default name of the type (for tables this would be the typename of all tables, individual table `__type` metatable key is not looked up).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Values other than userdata can have a shared metatable set with a `__type` value overriding the built-in default name of the type (for tables, this would be the typename of all tables, an individual table's `__type` metatable key is not looked up).
```

```c
void* lua_tolightuserdata(lua_State* L, int idx);
```

Converts the `lightuserdata` at the index to a lightuserdata pointer.
Returns a `nullptr` if the value is not a `lightuserdata`.
Tag value of the `lightuserdata` is ignored.

```c
void lua_pushlightuserdatatagged(lua_State* L, void* p, int tag);
```

Place a `lightuserdata` value `p` with tag `tag` on top of the stack.

```c
void lua_pushlightuserdata(lua_State* L, void* p);
#define lua_pushlightuserdata(L, p) // Implemented as a macro
```

Same as `lua_pushlightuserdatatagged` with a default `tag` of 0.

```c
int lua_lightuserdatatag(lua_State* L, int idx);
```

Returns the tag associated with a `lightuserdata` value at the index.
If the value at the index is not a `lightuserdata`, returns -1.

```c
void lua_setlightuserdataname(lua_State* L, int tag, const char* name);
```

Associate `lightuserdata` tag with a `name`.
Name cannot be reassigned.

```c
const char* lua_getlightuserdataname(lua_State* L, int tag);
```

Get the name associated with the `lightuserdata` tag.
If a name was not associated, returns `nullptr`.

## Userdata

> Userdata values are used to hold host data with lifetime managed by Luau.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Userdata values are used to hold host data with their lifetime managed by Luau.
```

> Userdata can have a metatable to enable custom behaviors of the value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Userdata can have a metatable to enable custom behaviors of the value in Luau code.
```

```

To improve performance of reading `userdata` fields which are retrieved through `__index` metamethod, Luau implements an access speedup mechanism.
This function associates an optional C function callback that can be used by Luau VM when a userdata field read access is detected.

Unlike `lua_registeruserdatadirectaccess`:

* the `field` string does not have to be associated with an atom value
* the environment of the function is restricted: it can only return the results through functions described below without any other VM interaction

Field name cannot be a `nullptr`.
Callback function cannot be a `nullptr`.

While the function does not require the userdata to have an `__index` metamethod, it is strongly recommended to have it and return consistent results with the direct callback.

```c
typedef void (*lua_UserdataDirectFieldGet)(void* ud, void* result);
```

Callback C function.

* `ud` - userdata data pointer
* `result` - VM-specific pointer to be provided as is to the result provider functions.

```c
void lua_userdatadirectfield_setnumber(void* result, double n);
```

Set a `number` return value.

```c

> void lua_userdatadirectfield_setvector(void* result, float x, float y, float z, float w); // LUA_VECTOR_SIZE is 4

Reviewer: ```suggestion
void lua_userdatadirectfield_setvector(void* result, float x, float y, float z, float w); // when LUA_VECTOR_SIZE is 4
```

> void lua_userdatadirectfield_setvector(void* result, float x, float y, float z); // LUA_VECTOR_SIZE is 3

Reviewer: ```suggestion
void lua_userdatadirectfield_setvector(void* result, float x, float y, float z); // when LUA_VECTOR_SIZE is 3
```

If call returns fewer than `nresults` values, additional `nil` values will be used to fill in missing returns.
If call returns more than `nresults` values, extra results will be removed from the stack.

`nresults` can be a `LUA_MULTRET` value, specifying a variable number of returns.
In this case, stack will contain the number of values returned from the call without adjustment.

If the call throws an error, it will propagate out of the function.
If a protected environment has not been established by an outer `lua_pcall`/`lua_cpcall` or `lua_resume`:

* If VM is built with `LUA_USE_LONGJMP`:
  * `panic` callback will be called
  * if there is no `panic` handler or `panic` handler doesn't jump away, an `abort` will be called
* If VM is built without `LUA_USE_LONGJMP`:
  * internal `std::exception` of an internal derived type will be thrown

```c
int lua_pcall(lua_State* L, int nargs, int nresults, int errfunc);
```

Similar to `lua_call`, but performs a call in a new protected environment, similar to Luau's `pcall`/`xpcall` functions.
Returns the status of the call, see the description of `lua_status`.

> Additional `errfunc` argument can be specified with an index of the error handling callback function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An additional `errfunc` argument can be supplied as an index to act as a callback function for error handling.
```

Reviewer: I think this is right? If not, might help to reword this more because it's a bit hard to parse as-is.

Author: I tried it out, but ended up rewriting this line completely (and adding an extra limitation)

When `errfunc` is not 0, if an error occurs, this error handling function will be called, similar to Luau's `xpcall` function.
When `errfunc` is 0, the error value passes through unchanged.

If an error occurred, the error object will be placed on the stack.

> We do not recommend using an `errfunc` index pointing into the arguments of the call being performed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We do not recommend using an `errfunc` index pointing at any of the arguments of the call being performed.
```

```c
int lua_cpcall(lua_State* L, lua_CFunction func, void* ud);
```

Performs a C function call in a new protected environment.
Function receives the specified `ud` pointer as its first argument (a `lightuserdata`).
Returns the status of the call, see the description of `lua_status`.

If the call succeeds, the return values placed on the stack are discarded.
If the call errors, the error object is placed on top of the stack (same as `lua_pcall`).

Function pointer `func` cannot be a `nullptr`.

This function can be used to work with Luau APIs when protected environment has not been established yet.

```c
int luaL_callyieldable(lua_State* L, int nargs, int nresults);
```

Similar to `lua_call`, but intended to perform the call from inside a yieldable C function.

> If callee yields, function returns a thread yield marker that has to be passed back to the VM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the callee yields, returns a thread yield marker that has to be passed back to the VM.
```

The function is best used as a split between C function start and the first potentially yielding call:

```c
int example(lua_State* L)
{
    ...
    return luaL_callyieldable(L, nargs, nreturns);
}

int exampleCont(lua_State* L, int status)
{
    ...
}
```

> Original `example` arguments and values placed on stack are preserved in the continuation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Original `example` arguments and values placed on the stack are preserved in the continuation.
```
